# implimentation

Everyone receives the new service 

Continuous improvement may happen, but the product or service is relatively stable 

There is typically less management scrutiny, and the design team isn’t at hand to help troubleshoot

Employees resolve issues on their own, without necessarily having access to research insights, etc.

The Role of Service Designer in Implementation
One aspect of your role as a service designer is to make sure the most important insights from the research and design phases are accessible for when you’re no longer around to advocate and relay the service design perspective. That’s why it’s important to explain not just what the design is, but why different design decisions were taken and, especially, why other logical alternatives were not pursued.

For example, a service design team was working on healthcare communication and received feedback that the colours chosen (pinks and reds) made men think it was a woman’s health topic only. That drove a design decision around the colour palette, which wasn’t documented. When another team re-created that same healthcare communication for a different context, they went with the same bright, cheerful colour palette that had been rejected during the prototyping phase. 

# socialization model

In a socialization model, service designers are heavily involved for a short period after you have handed off the core service design project. The role here is to “socialize“ the outputs with another team who will take it forward. Service designers typically spend their time interacting with stakeholders across the organization, building buy-in for the solution and the design rationale at a high level. This typically takes a short time because your role is to produce communication artifacts (PowerPoint presentations, videos, posters, etc.) that can be reused by the internal design team, which will then be responsible for communicating the project wider. 

## story telling

Here, service design involvement can mean taking on the role of “storyteller.”

Humans have always used stories for communication, amusement, reflecting emotions, and telling their experiences. In service design, storytelling is commonly used to reflect the consumer experience during the design process and the business value created through those experiences. It can be used in different stages of the design process and can be presented in different forms such as storyboards, photos, videos, and wireframes, etc. 

At the implementation phase of a project, the primary audience for storytelling is internal stakeholders: executives who need to approve investment, cross-functional teams who need to align to the vision and implementation teams who need to translate the design into reality. 

### Visualizing user interactions with service touchpoints

#### Adaptive journey mapping
–
The journey mapping you did in the early stages of design to create a shared understanding of user needs will come back into play in implementation. This will keep you from losing focus on who your customer is (what they say, think, do, and feel) and will ensure a consistent experience across touchpoints.


Refer back to Module 3 for a refresher on journey and empathy mapping.

#### Key creative and representational techniques
–
Service designers use creative and representational techniques that contribute to storytelling, such as: 

Workshop facilitation

Storyboarding

Persona development

Affinity mapping 

All of these techniques can be effective; which ones work best depends on the culture of the organization. If it’s an organization with a culture of six-page written memos, then that’s likely to be an effective format for your implementation storytelling. Familiar formats help stakeholders understand why the information is being shared with them and the kinds of actions they’re expected to take (offer feedback, make a decision, identify implications, etc.).

### The Role of Storytelling in Implementation 

1
From product owners to executives, storytelling can be used as a tool to present a narrative to many audiences
As a service designer, this means pulling yourself out of the details of the project to communicate the “so what?” to wider stakeholders. You need to move away from all the lovely design and balance it with organizational needs to achieve further buy-in. 

2
Storytelling helps us to continuously advocate for user perspectives as changes inevitably are made during implementation
No matter how thorough your service design efforts, there will always be aspects of the implementation that the design artifacts didn’t anticipate. Without storytelling, implementation teams can be at a loss in this situation. The artifacts don’t outline what to do, so there’s a tendency to opt for whatever’s easiest without concern for customer experience. With storytelling, implementation teams build more empathy and understanding for customers, so they’re better able to make decisions with the customer experience in mind.

3
Storytelling can help us overcome "the innovator’s dilemma"
When service design innovates new services, there can be strong organizational forces against implementing the new idea, especially if it endangers existing revenue streams. Think of the example of Eastman Kodak, an American company that dominated film photography in the 20th century then collapsed into bankruptcy in the early 21st century with the rise of digital photography. Kodak was actually a pioneer in digital photography but, in the short-term, there was great potential for digital photography to cannibalize revenue from their existing film business, so they never invested fully in new digital business models. Good storytelling can help overcome some of this institutional inertia by painting a vivid picture of future worlds where such investments are not made. 



Source: Harvard Business Review. Kodak’s Downfall Wasn’t About Technology. 15 July, 2016.

# coaching model

In a coaching model, service designers are involved throughout implementation, working closely with the teams responsible for the implementation. In this model, service designers typically spend their time doing more hands-on design work and coaching internal teams based on emerging needs in implementation. For instance, if technical constraints require a change from the original service design artifacts, service designers will help adapt the design. Even in the coaching model, service designer involvement is typically heavier up-front, because that’s when there’s still a lot of ambiguity and need to make more detailed decisions that draw upon the service designer’s work (discovery research, etc.). Over time, the ambiguity gets resolved, and there’s less need for the service designer’s expertise. 



The coaching model is a good place to talk about technology implementation. This is because it focuses on service design working closely with the implementation team as they’re building the technology, with involvement gradually fading away as the building progresses.

This is where you’ll spend a lot of time on specific details rather than the initial “big picture” design.

## agile vs. waterfall

- Agile is an incremental and iterative approach; waterfall is a linear and sequential approach.
- Agile development separates a project into sprints; waterfall development divides a project into phases.
- Agile helps complete many small projects; waterfall helps complete one single project.
- Requirements can be prepared as frequently as every day in agile, while requirements are prepared once at the start in waterfall.
- Agile allows requirement changes at any time; waterfall avoids scope changes once the project starts.
- Testing is performed concurrently with development in agile; the testing phase comes only after the build phase in a waterfall project.
- Test teams in agile can take part in requirements change; test teams in waterfall do not get involved in requirements change.

## User Stories in Implementation

User stories come into play at many stages throughout the design process, but in implementation, they’re especially useful to directing stakeholder attention to the customers who’ll be using the service or product, and to what you are trying to achieve.

As a [type of user], I want [an action] so there is [a benefit/a value]




# traditional change management
Traditional change management tends to ask the following questions:

- Change analysis - What are the changes that are going to be required to make the solution successful?
- Stakeholder analysis - Who is affected by these changes? What aspects will be welcome? What aspects will be unwelcome? Who will be our champions of the changes?
- Communication planning - What messages should we convey to different stakeholders to help them through the stages of awareness, desire, knowledge, ability, and reinforcement? How should those messages be delivered? When should we deliver them?


